Update readme (#3616)
perma-id/w3id.org: emmo/README.md

# EMMO
This [W3ID](https://w3id.org) provides a persistent URI namespace for the [Elementary Multiperspective Material Ontology (EMMO)](https://github.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/) and its domain ontologies.

## Redirection Rules
This section contains a general summary of the logic behind the redirection rules.

1. `https://w3id.org/emmo --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/EMMO/emmo{.html|.ttl}`
   - If the user is accessing this from a browser, redirect to html documentation on GitHub Pages.
   - Otherwise, redirect to the squashed .ttl file on GitHub Pages.
   - Special case for inferred ontology `https://w3id.org/emmo/emmo-inferred --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/EMMO/emmo-inferred.ttl`

2. `https://w3id.org/emmo/ --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/master/emmo.ttl`
   - `emmo.ttl` file in the root of the master branch.

3. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{VERSION} --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/EMMO/versions/{VERSION}/emmo{.html|.ttl}`
   - If the user is accessing this from a browser, redirect to html documentation for given version on GitHub Pages.

>    - Otherwise, redirect to squashed .ttl file for given version on GitHub Pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Otherwise, redirect to squashed `.ttl` file for given version on GitHub Pages.
```

   - Special case for inferred ontology `https://w3id.org/emmo/{VERSION}/emmo-inferred --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/EMMO/versions/{VERSION}/emmo-inferred.ttl`

4. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{VERSION}/ --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/{VERSION}/emmo.ttl`
   - `emmo.ttl` file in the root of branch/tag for the given version.

5. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{PATH}/{MODULE} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl`
   - Turtle file for given EMMO module.

6. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{VERSION}/{PATH}/{MODULE} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/{VERSION}/{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl`
   - Turtle file for given version and module of EMMO.

7. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{DOMAIN} --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/{DOMAIN}{.html|.ttl}`
   - If the user is accessing this from a browser, redirect to html documentation on GitHub Pages.

>    - Otherwise, redirect to squashed .ttl file on GitHub Pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Otherwise, redirect to squashed `.ttl` file on GitHub Pages.
```

   - Special case for inferred ontology `https://w3id.org/{DOMAIN}/{DOMAIN}-inferred --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/{DOMAIN}-inferred.ttl`

8. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{DOMAIN}/ --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/{REPO_NAME}/master/{DOMAIN}.ttl`
   - `{DOMAIN}.ttl` file in the root of the master branch.

9. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{DOMAIN}/{VERSION} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/{REPO_NAME}/{VERSION}/{DOMAIN}{.html|.ttl}`
   - If the user is accessing this from a browser, redirect to html documentation for given version on GitHub Pages.

>    - Otherwise, redirect to squashed .ttl file for given version on GitHub Pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Otherwise, redirect to squashed `.ttl` file for given version on GitHub Pages.
```

   - Special case for inferred ontology `https://w3id.org/{DOMAIN}/{VERSION}/{DOMAIN}-inferred --> https://emmo-repo.github.io/{REPO_NAME}/versions/{VERSION}/{DOMAIN}-inferred.ttl`

10. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{DOMAIN}/{VERSION}/ --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/{REPO_NAME}/{VERSION}/{DOMAIN}.ttl`

>    - `{DOMAIN}.ttl` file in the root of GitHub branch for the given version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - `{DOMAIN}.ttl` file in the root of GitHub branch for the given version.
```

11. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{DOMAIN}/{PATH}/{MODULE} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/{REPO_NAME}/master/{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl`
    - `{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl` file in master branch.

12. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{DOMAIN}/{VERSION}/{PATH}/{MODULE} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/{REPO_NAME}/{VERSION}/{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl`
    - `{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl` file for given version and module.

### Meaning of placeholders

> - `{NAME}`: Name part of an IRI, i.e. what follows after the hash sign.
> - `{VERSION}`; Version number. Must start with a digit to distinguish it from domain or path names.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `{NAME}`: Name part of an IRI, i.e., what follows after the hash sign.
- `{VERSION}`: Version number. Must start with a digit to distinguish it from domain or path names.
```

- `{PATH}`: Directory path within a github repository

> - `{MODULE}`: Filename of turtle file with the final .ttl stripped off

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `{MODULE}`: Filename of turtle file with the final `.ttl` stripped off
```

- `{DOMAIN}`: Name of domain ontology. Initial `domain-` is stripped off.
- `{REPO_NAME}`: Name of GitHub repository for domain ontology.

## Expected organisation of repositories for domain ontologies

### GitHub repository

> In the root of the repository we should have a file called {DOMAIN}.ttl. This should be the main file for the ontology. It should exist to make the ontology FAIR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the root of the repository, we should have a file called `{DOMAIN}.ttl`. This should be the main file for the ontology. It should exist to make the ontology FAIR.
```

### GitHub Pages
Using GitHub pages is optional.

> There are several use cases for using cases for using GitHub Pages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are several reasons to use GitHub Pages:
```

> - The main turtle file is generated from another semantic source.
>   In this case it make sense to distribute the ontology on GitHub pages to avoid polluting your GitHub repository.
> - Your ontology consists of many modules importing each other.
>   Loading them recursively from GitHub may be very slow.
>   To speed up the loading process, you could merge (squash) all modules into a single turtle file, which you could store on GitHub Pages.
> - You want to publish the inferred ontology, so that the user have full to the full inferred ontology without having to first running a reasoner.
> - Reference html documenting of classes and relations in the ontology.
>   The main aim of this document is to making the IRIs resolvable in a browser as human readable documentation of the concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- _The main turtle file is generated from another semantic source._
  In this case it make sense to distribute the ontology on GitHub pages to avoid polluting your GitHub repository.
- _Your ontology consists of many modules importing each other._
  Loading them recursively from GitHub may be very slow.
  To speed up the loading process, you could merge (squash) all modules into a single turtle file, which you could store on GitHub Pages.
- _You want to publish the inferred ontology, so that the user have full to the full inferred ontology without having to first running a reasoner._
- _Reference html documenting of classes and relations in the ontology._
  The main aim of this document is to making the IRIs resolvable in a browser as human readable documentation of the concepts.
```

>   The main aim of this document is to making the IRIs resolvable in a browser as human readable documentation of the concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The main aim of this document is to make the IRIs resolvable in a browser as human readable documentation of the concepts.
```

> Expected structure of GitHub pares:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expected structure of GitHub pages:
```

   - Target: `emmo.ttl` file in the root of branch/tag for the given version.

11. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{PATH}/{MODULE} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl`
   - Target: Turtle file for given EMMO module.

12. `https://w3id.org/emmo/{VERSION}/{PATH}/{MODULE} --> https://raw.githubusercontent.com/emmo-repo/EMMO/{VERSION}/{PATH}/{MODULE}.ttl`
   - Target: Turtle file for given version and module of EMMO.

### Meaning of placeholders
- `{NAME}`: Name part of an IRI, i.e., what follows after the hash sign.
- `{VERSION}`: Version number. Must start with a digit to distinguish it from domain or path names.
- `{PATH}`: Directory path within a github repository
- `{MODULE}`: Filename of turtle file with the final `.ttl` stripped off
- `{DOMAIN}`: Name of domain ontology. Initial `domain-` is stripped off.
- `{REPO_NAME}`: Name of GitHub repository for domain ontology.

## Expected organisation of repositories for domain ontologies

### GitHub repository
In the root of the repository, we should have a file called `{DOMAIN}.ttl`. This should be the main file for the ontology. It should exist to make the ontology FAIR.

> ### GitHub Pages

Reviewer 2: consider custom redirecting if needed: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/30167113/redirect-github-pages-to-custom-domain
